---
layout: blog
title: "What's the Deal with Gun Violence"
subtitle:A personal look into a misrepresented issue
category: Blog
cover: /blog/covers/guncontrol.jpg
date: 2017-10-25
---

When we talk about gun control, the flood gates open and we are bombarded with opinions from both sides of the political spectrum. Everyone has their two cents to put in, and everyone feels justified in whatever they feel is moral or right. Anecdotal evidence is spouted like a fountain, and both sides of the argument parrot whatever justification they received from friends or family that are "in the know". Who could possibly be in the right? Both sides of the polarizing argument are fighting for the protection of life, albiet in fundamentally different ways. Trying to make sense of motivations, applications, and effectiveness of proposed solutions is a monumental task. But cutting through the muck is exactly what needs to happen to fix the problem in the US.

The first barrier to a solution is the severe lack of data on gun related deaths. The National Rifle has been a prominent lobbyist in Washington, donating millions of dollars a year to conservative congressmen and other representatives. In 1996, Jay Dickey and the NRA lobbied successfully to prevent research money budgeted to the Center for Disease Control and Prevention from advocating or promoting gun control research. That has been in effect ever since, and the NRA shows no signs on letting up on that enforcement. As a country with one of the [largest firearm problems](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_countries_by_firearm-related_death_rate) in the world, we are cutting off our avenues for knowledge, accountability and progress in the pursuit of political interest. If the auto industry had lobbied nearly as much against seatbelts, then auto accidents would still be in the top ten leading causes of death [like they were in the 80's.](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_motor_vehicle_deaths_in_U.S._by_year)

But let's look at the numbers. The CDC does keep track of [mortality statistics](https://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/nvsr/nvsr65/nvsr65_04.pdf), and they are revealing in terms of shear statistics. For 2014, the number of people killed by guns was ~11,000, excluding suicide with a firearm. That is roughly 60% of homicides in the US being commited with a firearm, and of those, 80% were with a hand gun and not an assault weapon. That number is admittedly higher than a large percentage of developed countries, but how devestating is it really?

> Stripping away the politics and trying my best to focus on facts, I can't help but see that people are needlessly dying at the end of a barrel of a gun.

Every year, 600,000 people die of heart disease, and about 300,000 of those deaths are directly attributed to [obesity.](https://www.wvdhhr.org/bph/oehp/obesity/mortality.html) Car accidents are attributed to 37,000 deaths yearly. Suicide accounts for 43,000 deaths, and has risen into the top ten causes of death in the US. 60% of suicides are successfully carried out with a firearm, which means that even at conservative estimates, that is double the homicide rate when we look at the gun problem as a whole. 

So, you have a 3000% higher chance of dying due to being obese, than you do of being murdered with a gun. Car accidents are still a 3x deadlier instrument than a firearm, yet we still catch ourselves texting and driving. For the NRA as well as a large population of gun owners, it just doesn't seem to be a pressing issue. Guns are a tool for self defense, meant for keeping the peace of preserving life by show of force. Banning guns would be disasterous for a country so hard-coded to preserve the right to bear arms, so what is really the problem to address?

For one thing, we have the most mass shooting events of any developed country. By a long shot. For those incidents, any allowance is too much. The problem is only growing larger, with larger and more deadly events happening every year. If not held in check, the problem will only continue to grow. For me, that in itself is enough to spur a desire for change, and to at least research the problem without the influence of NRA lobbying. If it can prevent another Sandy Hook, Pulse Nightclub, or Mandalay Bay shooting, then it will be time and money well spent.

A larger issue at stake is the frightening suicide rate. Any given firearm is twice as likely to kill the person holding it, rather than anyone else. In a country with the equivalant of one gun per person, access to firearms as a means of suicide is a much larger problem than homicide, mass shootings, or terrorist attacks. I myself have been closely affected by that sobering statistic, as my father in took his own life, leaving my now wife without a father at 12 years old.

Guns are dangerous, that's no secret. In the hands of the wrong person, they can be casually lethal just as easily as they can be a tool for protection. I don't think that the amount of guns in the United States will ever go down. Our country was founded on a revolution held at the tip of a musket. So it's clear, that just as the auto industry before this, we need to take matters into our hands as a country to better determine how those guns are used, which is a problem often indirect to the guns themselves. Even if we look at the numbers and rationalize that it isn't as big of a problem as other causes of death or injury, we have to take an honest look at what we are doing to combat the problem for what it is. What I see is a country that is complacent in letting lobbyists dictate policy despite limited access to valuable research. I see grasping at straws and weak arguments as a result of a lack of sufficient data on gun violence. I see a nation divided in two over an issue that should be transcending red or blue boundaries over the preservation of human life. For a country with one of the worst firearm problems in the world, I see a lot of people more than willing to say, "Oh, it's not that bad". That in itself is a travesty.

Guns could be safer. The process to purchase a gun could be better controlled, with more provisions in place to prevent known violent offenders from having access to more lethal weapons. We need better care for those with mental illness, giving people better options than suicide to deal with their grief or pain. There are laws waiting in the wings to help make firearms safer without outright bans or barriers. I'll leave the specifics to people much more qualified than me, but I keep my finger on the pulse of this reactive issue, looking for opportunities to act in making life safer. But there is no reason not to act, other than the outdated opinions and morals of a powerful and manipulative few. To sit idly by and say that 30,000 is an acceptable amount of yearly deaths by gun violence is to be in part responsible for them. To acknowledge that there is a gun problem, then to say that we don't need to do anything about it, is preposterous.

I acknowledge that there is a gun problem in the United States. As much as the media tries to blow it out of proportion in both directions, I strongly believe there is an underlying issue to be addressed. Stripping away the politics and trying my best to focus on facts, I can't help but see that people are needlessly dying at the end of a barrel of a gun. But, I also recognize that guns need to have a place in our society, as a means of self defense and self-sufficiency. The happy silver lining is that all crime and violence has [been in decline](https://www.vox.com/policy-and-politics/2017/10/2/16399418/us-gun-violence-statistics-maps-charts) since the 90's. We are slowly working towards a better world. But to expect the issues to work themselves out is naive. What we need now more than anything is education, not politics. We should all be doing our best to truly take in both sides, to understand their points, reasons, and justifications. We need much more extensive research on guns, homicide and suicide. Then we can begin a more successful dialogue in addressing the problem of gun violence, and identifying solutions that fill the needs of both political parties and ideologies. I truly hope that 50 years from now, we can look back at this decade as the time we finally decided to take action together, whatever that action may be. But it won't be until we can all get off our high horses and listen to each other.
